Biologic activity and plasma clearance of prolactin-IgG complex in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical findings in hyperprolactinemic systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients with or without macroprolactinemia (big, big prolactin [PRL]) due to anti-PRL autoantibodies (PRL-IgG complex), and to assess the bioactivity and structure of big, big PRL. METHODS: Twenty-seven SLE patients with hyperprolactinemia (HPRL) were studied. Patients with (n = 8) or without (n = 19) big, big PRL were identified by gel filtration chromatography and affinity chromatography for IgG. NonePRL concentrations in serum and fractions by gel filtration chromatography and affinity chromatography were characterized by immunoradiometric assay (IRMA), Nb2 bioassay, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blotting, and clearance studies. RESULTS: SLE patients without big, big PRL had significantly higher levels of disease activity, cause-proven HPRL, and menstrual disturbances compared with patients with big, big PRL (P < or = 0.05). The big, big PRL fractions by Western blotting revealed a single 23-kd nonglycosylated PRL. The Nb2:IRMA ratio of the samples with big, big PRL was significantly higher than that of the samples without big, big PRL (P < or = 0.02). However, bioactivity of big, big PRL in the Nb2 cells was very similar to that of 23-kd nonglycosylated PRL. Clearance studies in rats demonstrated that the PRL-IgG complex was eliminated more slowly than monomeric PRL (little PRL). CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that the PRL-IgG complex was formed by 23-kd nonglycosylated PRL that was noncovalently bound to IgG and showed that the complex was fully active in vitro. This result suggests that the absence of symptoms of HPRL or lower levels of lupus activity in these patients is not explained by lower bioactivity of the complex. Instead, because of the large molecular size of the complex, the PRL does not easily cross the capillary walls. Delayed clearance of the PRL-IgG complex may account for increased serum levels of PRL in SLE patients with anti-PRL autoantibodies.