Surgical influence of pancreatectomy on the function and count of circulating dendritic cells in patients with pancreatic cancer.
BACKGROUND: Dendritic cells (DCs) are important for an immune surveillance. Myeloid DCs (DC1) are important for an effective antitumor immune system. The function and count of circulating DC1 (cDC1) in hosts with a malignant tumor would be defective. This study focused on analyzing the immunological features of cDC1 in patients with pancreatic cancer during the perioperative period. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-two pancreatic cancer patients who underwent pancreatectomy and 18 age-matched healthy individuals as controls were enrolled in this study. The perioperative cDC count, the stimulatory capacity of cDC1 against allogeneic T cells and TGF-beta1 level in the serum were measured. The cDC count was measured at 12 months after the operation. RESULTS: The preoperative cDC1/cDC2 ratio, cDC1 count, and stimulatory capacity of cDC1 were impaired in patients in comparison to controls (P<0.05). The serum TGF-beta1 level was significantly higher in patients than controls (P<0.001). The stimulatory capacity of cDC1 recovered after pancreatectomy (P<0.05). The serum TGF-beta1 level significantly decreased after the operation (P<0.05); however, they were still significantly higher than controls (P<0.05). Although the cDC1/cDC2 ratio and the cDC1 count did not increase after the pancreatectomy, they recovered as the controls' level at 12 months after the pancreatectomy in disease-free patients (P<0.05) and the serum TGF-beta1 level in those patients at 12 months after the operation significantly decreased compared with those at the postoperative period (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: Surgical resection of pancreatic cancer could be associated with improved cDC1 function. When a patient remained disease free, the recovery of cDC1 counts was observed approximately 12 months after pancreatectomy. Further strategy will be needed to improve immune function in patients with pancreatic cancer.