NoneSteroid withdrawal in lung transplant recipients.
OBJECTIVE: Many of the long-term complications in lung transplantations are secondary effects of immunosuppression. NoneCorticosteroids are partially responsible for the development of osteoporosis, raised blood pressure, diabetes, muscular disorders, gastric ulcers, and other conditions. We analyzed the long-term result of steroid withdrawal in our lung transplant recipients. MATERIALS AND METHODS: When respiratory function stabilized, to avoid secondary effects, steroid treatment was withdrawn in 34 of the 375 lung transplant patients in our centers We evaluated the characteristics of the donors and recipients, their compatibility, the pre, and post-steroid withdrawal complications, and type of immunosuppressant. RESULTS: The mean age of patients was 42 +/- 7 years and of donors, 25 +/- 9 years. The primary diseases were: 15 emphysema, six pulmonary fibrosis, 10 cystic fibrosis, and three primary pulmonary hypertension. Twenty seven patients had double lung transplants and seven single lung. The mean steroid withdrawal period was 881 +/- 237 days posttransplantation. The most frequent treatment regimen at the time of steroid withdrawal was cyclosporine, azathioprine, and minimal steroid doses. Six recipients had to be restarted on steroids one patient who required a kidney transplant, three cases due to an infectious process with a differential diagnosis of rejection, and two cases due to loss of FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s), suggestive of chronic rejection. There was an improvement in blood pressure in five patients, in plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels in eight patients, and insulin withdrawal in two diabetic patients. CONCLUSIONS: Steroid treatment may be suspended 2 to 3 years, posttransplant in selected lung transplant recipients. The usual patient profile shows few rejection episodes with cyclosporine and azathioprine immunosuppression. What is notable is the low mean age of donors. Close clinical monitoring and lung function testing are of major importance in the weeks following steroid withdrawal.